docs/PYTHON_INSTALLATION.md, before:

# Python SDK Installation

## Quick Install from PyPI (Recommended)

Pre-built wheels are available for common platforms. Choose the package that matches your hardware:

| Hardware | Install Command |
|----------|----------------|
| NVIDIA GPUs (CUDA) | `pip install mistralrs-cuda` |
| Apple Silicon (Metal) | `pip install mistralrs-metal` |
| Apple Accelerate | `pip install mistralrs-accelerate` |
| Intel CPUs (MKL) | `pip install mistralrs-mkl` |
| CPU only | `pip install mistralrs` |

All packages install the `mistralrs` Python module. The package suffix only controls which accelerator features are enabled.

```bash
# Example: Install with CUDA support
pip install mistralrs-cuda -v
```

## Build from Source

Building from source gives you access to the latest features and allows customization of build options.

### Prerequisites

1. **Install system packages:**

   Ubuntu/Debian:
   ```bash
   sudo apt install libssl-dev pkg-config
   ```

   macOS:
   ```bash
   brew install openssl pkg-config
   ```

2. **Install Rust** from https://rustup.rs/:
   ```bash
   curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
   source $HOME/.cargo/env
   ```

3. **(Optional) Set up HuggingFace authentication** for gated models:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.cache/huggingface
   echo "YOUR_HF_TOKEN" > ~/.cache/huggingface/token
   ```
   Or use `huggingface-cli login`.

### Build Steps

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/EricLBuehler/mistral.rs.git
   cd mistral.rs/mistralrs-pyo3
   ```

2. **Create and activate a virtual environment:**
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # Linux/macOS
   # or: .venv\Scripts\activate  # Windows
   ```

3. **Install maturin** (Rust + Python build tool):
   ```bash
   pip install maturin[patchelf]
   ```

4. **Build and install:**
   ```bash
   maturin develop -r --features <your-features>
   ```

### Feature Flags

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `cuda` | NVIDIA GPU support |
| `flash-attn` | Flash Attention (CUDA, Ampere+) |
| `flash-attn-v3` | Flash Attention v3 (CUDA, Hopper) |
| `cudnn` | cuDNN optimizations |
| `metal` | Apple Silicon GPU (macOS only) |
| `accelerate` | Apple Accelerate framework |
| `mkl` | Intel MKL |

Example with CUDA and Flash Attention:
```bash
maturin develop -r --features "cuda flash-attn cudnn"
```

## Verify Installation

```python
import mistralrs
print(mistralrs.__version__)
```

Quick test:
```python
from mistralrs import Runner, Which, ChatCompletionRequest

runner = Runner(
    which=Which.Plain(model_id="Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B"),
)

response = runner.send_chat_completion_request(
    ChatCompletionRequest(
        model="default",
        messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello!"}],
        max_tokens=50,
    )
)
print(response.choices[0].message.content)
```

## Next Steps

- [SDK Documentation](PYTHON_SDK.md) - Full SDK reference
- [Examples](https://github.com/EricLBuehler/mistral.rs/tree/master/examples/python) - Python examples
- [Cookbook](https://github.com/EricLBuehler/mistral.rs/blob/master/examples/python/cookbook.ipynb) - Interactive tutorial

Commit message:

Release v0.7.0 (#1853)
* Bump to 0.7.0

* Update readme

* Tweak tagline

* Tweak tagline

* abi3.10 for pyo3

* Add better python deploy infra

* Only manylinux on docker

* Fix ownership

* Fix name

* Dont copy in cuda libs

* Update install scripts

* Mention dll windows requirements

* Mention dll windows requirements

docs/PYTHON_INSTALLATION.md, after:

# Python SDK Installation

## Quick Install from PyPI (Recommended)

Pre-built wheels are available for common platforms. Choose the package that matches your hardware:

| Hardware | Install Command |
|----------|----------------|
| **Recommended (auto-optimized)** | `pip install mistralrs` |
| NVIDIA GPUs (CUDA) | `pip install mistralrs-cuda` |
| Apple Silicon (Metal) | `pip install mistralrs-metal` |
| Apple Accelerate | `pip install mistralrs-accelerate` |
| Intel CPUs (MKL) | `pip install mistralrs-mkl` |

### Platform-Specific Optimizations

The `mistralrs` base package includes platform-specific optimizations:
- **macOS Apple Silicon**: Metal GPU support built-in
- **Linux/Windows x86_64**: Intel MKL optimizations built-in
- **Linux aarch64**: CPU-only (use `mistralrs-cuda` for GPU support)

All packages install the `mistralrs` Python module. The package suffix controls which accelerator features are enabled.

### Supported Platforms

| Package | Linux x86_64 | Linux aarch64 | Windows x86_64 | macOS aarch64 |
|---------|:------------:|:-------------:|:--------------:|:-------------:|
| mistralrs | MKL | CPU | MKL | Metal |
| mistralrs-cuda | CUDA | CUDA | CUDA | - |
| mistralrs-metal | - | - | - | Metal |
| mistralrs-accelerate | - | - | - | Accelerate |
| mistralrs-mkl | MKL | - | MKL | - |

**Python version**: 3.10+ (wheels use abi3 for forward compatibility)

### Windows Requirements

**It is recommended to use WSL2 on Windows machines.**

On Windows, additional runtime dependencies may be required:

- **CUDA packages**: Install the [NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads) and ensure the `bin` directory is in your PATH
- **MKL packages**: Install the [Intel oneAPI Math Kernel Library](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/onemkl.html) runtime

```bash
# Example: Install with CUDA support
pip install mistralrs-cuda -v
```

## Build from Source

Building from source gives you access to the latest features and allows customization of build options.

### Prerequisites

1. **Install system packages:**

   Ubuntu/Debian:
   ```bash
   sudo apt install libssl-dev pkg-config
   ```

   macOS:
   ```bash
   brew install openssl pkg-config
   ```

2. **Install Rust** from https://rustup.rs/:
   ```bash
   curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
   source $HOME/.cargo/env
   ```

3. **(Optional) Set up HuggingFace authentication** for gated models:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.cache/huggingface
   echo "YOUR_HF_TOKEN" > ~/.cache/huggingface/token
   ```
   Or use `huggingface-cli login`.

### Build Steps

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/EricLBuehler/mistral.rs.git
   cd mistral.rs/mistralrs-pyo3
   ```

2. **Create and activate a virtual environment:**
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # Linux/macOS
   # or: .venv\Scripts\activate  # Windows
   ```

3. **Install maturin** (Rust + Python build tool):
   ```bash
   pip install maturin[patchelf]
   ```

4. **Build and install:**
   ```bash
   maturin develop -r --features <your-features>
   ```

### Feature Flags

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `cuda` | NVIDIA GPU support |
| `flash-attn` | Flash Attention (CUDA, Ampere+) |
| `flash-attn-v3` | Flash Attention v3 (CUDA, Hopper) |
| `cudnn` | cuDNN optimizations |
| `metal` | Apple Silicon GPU (macOS only) |
| `accelerate` | Apple Accelerate framework |
| `mkl` | Intel MKL |

Example with CUDA and Flash Attention:
```bash
maturin develop -r --features "cuda flash-attn cudnn"
```

## Verify Installation

```python
import mistralrs
print(mistralrs.__version__)
```

Quick test:
```python
from mistralrs import Runner, Which, ChatCompletionRequest

runner = Runner(
    which=Which.Plain(model_id="Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B"),
)

response = runner.send_chat_completion_request(
    ChatCompletionRequest(
        model="default",
        messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello!"}],
        max_tokens=50,
    )
)
print(response.choices[0].message.content)
```

## Next Steps

- [SDK Documentation](PYTHON_SDK.md) - Full SDK reference
- [Examples](https://github.com/EricLBuehler/mistral.rs/tree/master/examples/python) - Python examples
- [Cookbook](https://github.com/EricLBuehler/mistral.rs/blob/master/examples/python/cookbook.ipynb) - Interactive tutorial
